Why track your time?
Okay, it helps you determine if your estimate was any good in the first place.
Say task 204 was estimated at 16 hours.
If you're tracking your time,
let's say the actual hours after completing the task,
was 21 hours.
What does this mean?
Poor estimation technique?
Maybe, maybe you need to improve that.
More training needed for the developer?
Maybe.
Maybe you can provide that additional training.
Other issues might be coming around there.
All these are excellent feedback used to improve your estimation process.
So now you can find out just why it took longer.
You can also tell your customer why it took longer.
And everyone can move forward knowing what really happened.
It also helps you track actuals to estimates.
Is your task on track?
Again, task 204 is estimated at 16 hours.
Your developer says he has used 4 hours and is about
30% complete with its functionality.
That is good.
That's ahead of plan.
30% is ahead of plan.
So you can say great, keep on working.
On the next slide we'll take a few more reasons why to track your time.
Other good reasons.
For example, helps you find issues early in your project.
If task 204 was estimated at 16 hours,
and your developer says he has used 12 hours and is about
30% complete with its functionality, well you know that's not good.
Activity is behind plan.
The programmer used 75% of the hours, but only 30% complete.
So maybe you could, you know, take some corrective action.
Also,
by tracking your time it will help you improve future
estimates and your process can be improved.
As we mentioned earlier, it allows you to take corrective action.
Are the requirements more complex than you thought?
Maybe you have to have a better requirements gathering process.
Does the team need more training?
Maybe they need more software training or database training
so they can meet their estimates better.
Or you can add more time based on their skill level in the future.
Was there some other event or issue that caused this person
to take longer than we originally thought?
So the bottom line is it allows you to be proactive,
to remediate any issues early.
You don't want to get to the end of 1, 000 hour project,
only to come in at 1, 200 hours.
You want to know early the little issues that might happen,
correct those issues, educate the stakeholders,
reevaluate, re-estimate, and move forward.
Yep, I've got more reasons why you should track your time, on the next slide.
Another good reason is by tracking your time it will help you develop
low and high estimate brackets for future projects.
So it'll allow us to use our track data for the pre-launch,
top down historical model that we talked about earlier in this module.
It also supports the hybrid model as well.
When we re-estimate based on actuals.
So if we're tracking our time,
we're monitoring what's going on and based on the actual data we can
re-estimate the tasks that have yet to be completed,
based on that data.
It also gives you a solid data for your management or your customer.
You should provide a periodic status report to your customer.
A cost status for example.
We've used 225 hours of a 500 hour project.
I've used 45%.
Schedule status.
We are 6 weeks into a 16 week project.
I'm 37.
5% complete.
Without the tracking of your hours, and the actuals against those estimates,
you'll be unable to provide good, succinct data to your customers.
And you always want to be able to provide a project
summary for your customers as well.
Are you on track?
If not, adjust the estimate and schedule if need be.
Re-estimate and continue to track your time.
Yep, just one more slide, hang in there,
on reasons why you need to track your time.
Here are some more good reasons to track your time.
It'll keep you in business.
So whether you're independent or in corporate America,
tracking your time will be a good best practice to
actually keep you in business.
All managers and team leaders and independent contractors
must regularly report true and valid cost and schedule
information to your customers.
Whether you're in corporate America or you're independent.
And customers will greatly appreciate you and it builds trust and a
long-term relationship therefore a long-term career.
Allows you to compare estimates to actual costs.
Enables you to validate estimates against the actual time and money expended.
It allows you to improve your estimating models.
And lastly allows you to improve your scheduling models as well.
All good things. Now, let's talk about techniques and how to monitor the tracking of your time.